---
id: 'en-crisis-cyber-origin-keys-operational-and-strategic-management'
nom: 'Crisis of cyber origin, the keys to operational and strategic management'
langue: 'EN'
collections:
  - 'Crise cyber'
listeDocuments:
  - '[object Object]'
dateMiseAJour: '2022-05-17T00:00:00.000Z'
thematique: 'Crisis management'
besoins:
  - 'SECURISER'
---

<p>The disruption involved in a cyber crisis forces organisations to adapt and operate in unusual ways. These sudden and uncertain upheavals cause stress and complicate decision-making, while remediation actions must be decided and executed quickly to limit the impact.<br> "It is not possible to improvise a response in the middle of a disaster. The preparation, tools and training are essential to maintain activity in the event of a computer attack", says Guillaume Poupard, Director-General of ANSSI.<br> To meet this need, ANSSI has published the guide Crisis of cyber origin, the keys to operational and strategic management, in partnership with CDSE. Aimed at anyone involved in the response to a cyber crisis, this guide enables organisations to adapt their existing crisis management system to take into account the specific aspects of cyber crises.<br> Addressing both crisis preparation and response, this guide, made up of 18 practical sheets, proposes objectives to be reached for each phase of crisis preparation and response and is addressed to each of the actors at the strategic and operational levels.<br> The advice and best practices it presents are enhanced by several feedbacks from organisations that have been victims of cyber attacks. Their concrete examples and testimonies of the lessons they have learned complement the course of a crisis.</p><p><a class="post-attachment post-attachment-application-pdf" href="/documents-guides/20220516_np_anssi_guide_gestion_crise_cyber_en1.pdf">Crisis of cyber origin, the keys to operational and strategic management</a></p><p><em>This guide is part of the "Cyber Crisis Management" collection, designed to help organisations prepare for and manage a cyber crisis. This collection is composed of three volumes</em>: Organising a cyber crisis management exercise<em> (available in </em><a href="https://cyber.gouv.fr/publications/organiser-un-exercice-de-gestion-de-crise-cyber"><em>French</em></a><em> and </em><a href="https://cyber.gouv.fr/en/publications/organising-cyber-crisis-management-exercise"><em>English</em></a><em>), </em>Crisis of cyber origin, the keys to operational and strategic management <em>(available in </em><a href="https://cyber.gouv.fr/publications/crise-cyber-les-cles-dune-gestion-operationnelle-et-strategique"><em>French</em></a><em> and <a href="https://cyber.gouv.fr/publications/crisis-cyber-origin-keys-operational-and-strategic-management" target="_blank">English</a></em><em>) and </em>Anticipating and managing your cyber crisis communication<em> (available in </em><a href="https://cyber.gouv.fr/publications/anticiper-et-gerer-sa-communication-de-crise-cyber"><em>French</em></a><em> and <a href="https://cyber.gouv.fr/publications/anticipating-and-managing-your-cyber-crisis-communication" target="_blank">English</a></em><em>). This collection aims to provide a cross-sectoral expertise on all aspects of cyber crisis management.</em></p>
